---
layout: post
title: "An Adventure in Socket.io"
description: "A Meandering Reflection "
tags: [socket.io, modularization, javascript, refactoring, gaming]
image:
  feature: abstract-6.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---

So,  it is your first ever multiplayer web game and you're just getting into using Socket.io with Node.js. You've got a deadline and you're a few days away from it. Having almost no experience with Socket.io, what would you do? Well, I have no idea as to what you would do but what I have seen done (and, admittedly, have done myself) looks something like this: 

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
{% raw %}
// Lines 95 - 128
 socket.on('ready', function( flags ) {
   var room = ids[socket.id];
   if(flags !== undefined) {
     var instance = ids[socket.id];
         instance = rooms[instance];
    for(var k in instance.socketid) { 
       io.sockets.socket(instance.socketid[k]).emit('reMap', snapshot[room]);
    }
    return;
   }
   io.sockets.socket(socket.id).emit('draw', snapshot[room]);
 });
  
 socket.on('insert_player', function( name ) {
   var instance = ids[socket.id];
       instance = rooms[instance];

    for(var i in instance.socketid) {
      if(instance.socketid[i] !== socket.id) {
       io.sockets.socket(instance.socketid[i]).emit('addPlayer', name);
      };
    }
 });

  socket.on('updatemove', function( x, y, animation, client_name, velx, vely) { // eventually store and do checking before broadcasting
  	var instance = ids[socket.id];
        instance = rooms[instance];
    if(instance === undefined) {
      return;
    }
    for(var i in instance.socketid) { // My next refactoring will be to use velocity rather than x/y
        io.sockets.socket(instance.socketid[i]).emit('moveplayer', x, y, animation, client_name, velx, vely);	  
  	}                                
  });
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

And perhaps after a few hundred lines of logic you'll end up with something like this: 

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
{% raw %}
// We are at line 300.
var catgroove = function( room ) {
  if(room.difficulty === 5) {
    return;
  };
  
  for(var i in room.socketid) {
      io.sockets.socket(room.socketid[i]).emit('Scale', {diff: room.difficulty});
    };

  var that = room; 
  var nextDifficulty = that.difficulty * 20000;
  that.difficulty += 1; 

  setTimeout(function(){
    catgroove(that);
  }, nextDifficulty)
};
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

At some point if you're meandering through this adventure in Socket.io you'll begin to realize that as you tack on more and more features, as the logic gets deeper and deeper, it becomes nearly impossible to manage; on my first project I was scrolling back and forth trying to find what socket event was connected to which listener and vice versa. By the time you finish and reach your second project you'll probably twitch at the sight of any above code and if anyone suggests using Socket.io you may end up recalling the terror of the endless spaghetti code that plagued you on previous project and immediately work to separate your concerns - something that you intuitively knew you should have done but for some reason decided to #yolo it. 

Most often rather than not your working prototype ends up being the final product; why would you want to double up on your work, why would you want to make head your explode? And it is fairly true that few frameworks have ideal best-practices example code in their documentation ( a whole nother net space should be dedicated to a rant on that). To make matters worse we all have feature milestones and deadlines to face - great. 

That all being said and done I’d like to distill some of my experience so that the same mistake doesn’t plague you in a future project. Specifically, if you’re going thinking of using a heavy Node + Socket.io backend to a multiplayer game. Even if you aren’t making a game there might be a chance you might learn something new, be it a new perspective or technique, so stick around - at the very least you might get a laugh at my own struggles. 

Multiplayer games are complex especially if you’re dealing with real time (case and point: [synchronous lock-step architecture](http://www.altdevblogaday.com/2011/07/09/synchronous-rts-engines-and-a-tale-of-desyncs/) ) and while Socket.io does provide a basic subscription model for you to use it isn’t sufficient if you need to keep clients in sync with each other. So, basically the first consideration you should make is to figure out what your architecture is going to look like. Yes, the advice is pretty obvious but the temptation to simply hack away is more often stronger than the cautious route - one feature turns into ten and suddenly you have a bit of spaghetti code. So, let’s talk about architecture! 

In the two game projects I participated in the requirements were the following: real-time, multiplayer, the ability to have multiple rooms (or instances of the game so you and your friends could play without having others interfere), and score keeping.  How did I structure my server with those requirements? Well, the first time around it was a complete hogwash (which I am trying to give you advice so you can avoid that) and the second time around it was slightly better. Here’s what I learned. The first matter is figuring out what your concerns are and by that I mean what are the common themes you’ll be receiving from the client. For example, a player joining your server will need to know about the other clients and sync up with those clients; a player leaving the server will need to alert the other clients that the player is leaving; a player who joins a different game will need to switch game rooms and alert the relevant clients of its status through the server. These examples all fall under a sort of ‘logistics’, if you will, and could probably be separated out as a separate module. 

 [Socket.io](socket.io docs) ‘s interface can be more or less summed up as  broadcast-receive-broadcast or broadcast-receive-anything and the syntax often follows this structure: `socket.on( `event-as-a-string`, arguments)` and socket.broadcast(`event-as-a-string`, arguments) - the latter is strictly for the server side and speaking of which on the server you’ll put all the socket.io events inside `socket.on(‘connection’, function() {})` . So, given this structure what did I do? Well, here’s what I did: 
 {% highlight javascript linenos %}
{% raw %}
var Manager = function( context, io ) {
  var events = new Events({context: context, host: host, io: io});
  return function( socket ) {
    socket.on('join', function( args ) {
      events.flow.join(socket, args);
    });
    socket.on('disconnect', function( args ) {
      events.flow.disconnect(socket, args);
    });
    socket.on('flow', function( type, args ) {
      events.flow[type](socket, args);
    });
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}
Instead of seeing that meandering code I had earlier (both my own handwritten stuff and the one in the open source project I worked on) I moved it to a separate module much like you would do with request handlers on a Node server. Then I separated it a bit further by storing the event listeners in an object so that the client could emit its socket.on event as `socket.on(‘player’ , ‘join’, playerData)` . This allows me to take advantage of how you can access object properties in Javascript allowing me to further separate the concerns through another Node module. In summary, I have an object that contains the event listeners which can be accessed based on the first and second arguments provided by the Socket that is emitting them. So, the data flow looks something like this: 

`socket.emit('player', 'join', room_name) --> 

 socket.on('player', function(args) {
   events.player[SecondArg](socket, args)
 });

 SecondArg = 'join' , args = room_name`

Well, that covers the basic technique of what I did to make the back end a bit more tolerable. I'll cover the rest in a series of posts and I'll leave links below so you can compare and contrast between my first project and my second one involving Socket.io. Thanks for dropping by!

[First](https://github.com/steinernein/kimchi/tree/master/server)
[Second](https://github.com/steinernein/Satellite/tree/refactor/server)

## Links to the other parts: 
[Socket.io management](http://steinernein.github.io/socket2/)
[Synchronization of multiplayer](http://steinernein.github.io/socket3/)