---
layout: post
title: "An Adventure in Socket.io II"
description: "A Meandering Reflection II"
tags: [socket.io, modularization, javascript, refactoring, gaming, instantiation, events]
image:
  feature: abstract-6.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
comments: true
share: true
---

In an earlier [post](http://steinernein.github.io/socket/) I went over what issues a new Socket.io user faces, with the optional compounding stress, how I blundered, and how I solved the entire mess -- albeit without proper documentation which produced a bit of confusion initially, here's a protip: document your things, all the things, even if your peers say that your code should be self-documenting and documentation isn't necessary.

Previously I left off on how I divided Socket.io concerns by using a Javascript object as a gate keeper of sorts and used the property accessor as flow control. This time I'd like to begin completing the picture by showing you how I managed the events after they had been redirected. So, I'll begin by leaving this here: 

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
{% raw %}
module.exports = function (map, host, Sync, io) {
  return {
    join: function( socket, data ) {
      var target;
      if(host.rooms[data.room] === undefined) {
        host.init(socket, data.room, data);
        target = host.rooms[data.room];
        host.rooms[data.room].bot = globals();
        target.bot.lastClient = socket.id;
        target.bot.clients[socket.id] = true; 
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

The above code is an example of what you would find if you went to the events folder in my Socket.io management strategy while the below code is part of that gate keeper/flow control I described in my earlier post. Just as a recap with how these two work you would do the following; initialize events by calling `new Events(initializationData)` then reference the various events, such as `Events.combat` in the callback function in `socket.on('connection', myCallBack)` such that when your server receives a Socket event the second argument gets passed into `Events.combat[secondArgument]` and is properly invoked. 

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
{% raw %}

var connectionFlow = require('../events/connections');
var movement       = require('../events/movement');
var combat         = require('../events/combat');
var player         = require('../events/player');
var globals        = require('../events/globals');

var Events = function( init ) {
  var sync = new Sync();

  var host = init.host,
    io = init.io,
    context = init.context;

  this.flow     = connectionFlow(context, host, sync, io);
  this.player   = player(host, sync, io);
  this.combat   = combat(host, sync);
  this.movement = movement(host, sync);
  this.bot      = player(host, sync, io);
};

module.exports = Events;

{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

So that is more or less the whole picture of how I structured things in the back end when it comes to Socket.io event flow. I'd like to now explain why I did things the way I did it. 

`var Events` utilizes a typical pseudo-classical instantiation pattern. I chose this because it follows standard convention at least in terms of instantiation patterns. There isn't a particular advantage it conveys nor disadvantage in doing so this way; I could easily see a functional instantiation or even functional-shared since I only need one. Either way, you only need one of these in any given system and should only have one - a singleton pattern would be nice. 

Now, perhaps something that is more interesting why I chose to use [partial application](steinernein.github.io/currying/) in the first block of code. Well, the reason is that I wanted to take advantage of how `module.exports` works; I needed a way to have the individual functions within the module have reference to certain data structures without having to pass them in over and over into the function -- it was a measure born out of the desire to shorten the code, make it readable, and make it flexible. 

However, there is an issue with it in that there is still specific syntax required for things to work and it isn't truly decoupled though at the same time I could make the argument that it is how I've set up the interface.  Regardless, by using closures (and partial application), I am able to shorten the amount of code and make things a bit more tidy for the reader rather than having each function hold 5-6 different arguments -- that gets cumbersome. 

So what's the take away? Use various instantiation patterns, don't stick with one, to make Socket.io work for you in terms of managing the sea of `socket.on` events and have it be readable so you can easily expand it without having to document it extensively. Though, ideally, you should find time to document your code anyways (you can see this in my project readme for the server side and some of the client side in [Satellite](github.com/steinernein/satellite/)).

I'll update this post if I have more thoughts on instantiation patterns and Socket.io.

[Click here for the last installment](steinernein.github.io/socket3/)